The National priorities of detection, validation, and characterization of exoplanets all depend critically on extremely precise radial-velocity (RV) measurement. It is also critical to current NASA missions: NASA is a partner in the NEID spectrograph, TESS discoveries are validated and characterized with RV measurements, spectroscopic targets for JWST are identified and vetted with RV surveys, and the feasibility and design of future space-based IR-UV facilities depend on both individual RV-characterized planets and also the statistics of planet populations.
The error budget for precision RV measurement is complex, including terms from hardware stability, calibration noise, data processing, atmospheric absorption, spectral templates, and stellar variability and activity. This proposal focuses on ideas, algorithms, and software that support the 1D spectral data extraction and RV measurements themselves, working close to the metal. This level in the problem is important for a number of reasons: (A) The proposer has world-leading expertise in two-dimensional and one-dimensional spectroscopic data analysis methods and code. (B) This part of the problem is usually relegated to instrument teams and often relies on legacy code; it is time for new open-source, extensible, and sustainably maintained platforms. (C) Spectral extraction and RV measurement are both absolutely critical to the end-to-end scientific program; if any resolution, signal-to-noise, or information is sacrificed at any point in this process, the community is not using its hardware capabilities to their fullest potential.
The proposal supports three activities. The first (WP1) is to build an open-source, data-driven model for one-dimensional high-resolution stellar spectroscopy that has good causal structure and is highly extensible. This model will be both algorithms and code, the latter in community-supported python and jax. The model can be used to make RV measurements that demonstrably saturate information-theoretic bounds, to build from multi-epoch observations empirical stellar and telluric templates, and to learn (and learn from) stellar and telluric variability. The code built in WP1 is designed with extensibility, maintainability, and community engagement as top design considerations.
The second activity (WP2) is to build an open-source spectroscopic data simulator. This simulator will combine highest-available-resolution models of stellar photospheres and the atmosphere with effective models of spectrograph line-spread functions, pixelizations, calibrations, and noise models to produce highly realistic simulated RV data. The simulator can produce realistic 2D or 1D data, and thus test not just 1D data analysis methods but also 2D extraction methods. The simulator will be flexible such that it can simulate data for any spectrograph; as part of WP2 it will be delivered with settings pre-determined for a few high-impact spectrographs including NASA NEID.
The third activity (WP3) is to analyze and extend 2D extraction algorithms with an eye to maximum RV information transmission to the end user. The flat-relative optimal extraction (FROE) and spectro-perfectionism (SP) models for extraction of 1D spectra from 2D spectrograph images both make assumptions that slightly degrade spectral resolution and sacrifice Fisher information. In both cases, these assumptions can be weakened. As part of WP3, new algorithms and open-source code will be produced. In the long run, RV measurements may be made directly in the 2D imaging, without any explicit spectral extraction. Analysis of this possibility is also part of WP3.
In addition to delivering algorithms, open-source code, documentation, and refereed scientific papers for each of the three activities (WP1, WP2, WP3), the proposal includes community workshops to build and support the National and Global hardware and software communities working on RV measurements.
